Docs: The Insights Module (#11175)
directus/directus: docs/app/insights.md

# Insights

> > Insights is a module in Directus that allows rapid, no-code buildout of analytics dashboards. Regardless of your

Reviewer: > module in Directus

I usually capitalize our extensions (eg: `Module`), but we should decide if that's something we want to do moving forward. Also, maybe we say "Module _of_ Directus"?

Reviewer 2: I'd like to keep all our "custom names" capitalized, so it'll be a Module / Interface / Display etc etc

Author: Okay swag. I saw one instance in the docs where that wasn't the case and rolled with lowercase.
Def down to capitalize and had/have the impulse in my fingers to do the same.
(If I'm becoming the main tech docs geezer, I'm happy to shred them apart and touch up- once I know all the standards)

> use-case (_be it business intelligence, user progress tracking, web traffic conversions, or whatever_!) you will be
> able to setup key data metrics in just a few clicks.

![image of dashboard(s)](../assets/insights-images/insights_dashboards.gif)

- [How it Works](#how-it-works)
- [Dashboards Overview](#dashboards-overview)
- [Panels Overview](#panels-overview)
  - [Panel Header Options](#panel-header-options)
  - [Label Overview](#label-overview)
  - [List Overview](#list-overview)
  - [Metrics Overview](#metrics-overview)
    - [Style and Format Options](#style-and-format-options)
  - [Time Series Overview](#time-series-overview)
  - [Advanced Filtering](#advanced-filtering)
- [Tutorial Video](#tutorial-video)
- [Extensibility Options](#extensibility-options)

## How it Works

> ![gif/video of setting up dashboard and panels](image.gif)

Reviewer 3: Is this image working?
I am not seeing any inserted `image.gif` in this PR 🤔

> 1. Create a new dashboard by clicking the `+` icon in the upper right hand corner.

Reviewer: Not sure if it was merged, but we should start using the inline icons that @Nitwel created: `+`

Reviewer 2: Not yet, as we're blocked on figuring out final image specs before that one can be merged 👍🏻

Author: okay sweet. "page header". noted.

Reviewer: In general, we just want to re-use and reference this naming system... just helps stay consistent: https://docs.directus.io/app/overview/

Author: Okay. I will straight-up make flashcards to learn the Directus terms.
Will take time to get it all in my blood though.

2. Name your dashboard and add a brief note to describe its purpose.
3. Click the edit icon in the upper right hand corner, then hit `+` to add a panel.

> 4. Select a panel type, then use Panel Options to setup metrics.

Author: I'm not totally sure what you mean. 
Just like add an in-page link to the panel-types listed below?

> 4. Select a panel type, then use Panel Options to setup metrics.

Reviewer: This line references "Selecting a panel type"... but they won't know the difference between types yet. So I'm recommending adding a link here (eg `Learn more about Panel types`) to where you describe the types/options lower on this page.

> 4. Select a panel type, then use Panel Options to setup metrics.

Author: You're right! I'm going to link it and also add a soft-intro paragraph right here as well....

I just added "First, create a Dashboard. Then fill the Dashboard with Panels. Each Panel provides some unique type of analytics insight". LMK your thoughts. Obviously you will see it live soon, too!

### Intro Video

> This [Intro video](https://www.example.com) will give you a firm overview of the insights module.

Reviewer 3: We need to wait for the video or it was not included here?

Author: @joselcvarela 
This doc is NOT intended to be complete. It is in draft mode.

Images will need to be completely redone.
(We haven't seemed to decide on Webp vs PNG, width, etc..)

Wanted to get this up and discuss what is working and what needs improvement.

Reviewer 3: When you think a PR has some work to do, you can create a Draft PR instead of a normal PR.
I am converting this to draft then 👍

Author: Okay, sounds good. "draft PR" noted.

## Dashboards Overview

A Directus dashboard provides a drag-and-drop, snappy-grid area where you create and edit panels, which provide
analytics information. The Dashboard area automatically expands as you add more and more panels. In theory, a dashboard
area can expand infinitely large... but in practice, users will probably only want to build dashboards as large as the
screen they will be viewing on. You are able to create as many dashboards as you need. Additionally, the Dashboard view,

> edit, and create permissions can be turned on and off based on user role.

Author: Okay, cool.
I have been trying to keep that "7th grader" vocab on indirect language.
Will turn it up a step.

@benhaynes @rijkvanzanten what else can they do?

> edit, and create permissions can be turned on and off based on user role.

Reviewer: No worries. Yeah, you can turn CRUD on/off... or use custom filters for dynamic permissions, adjust individual fields, and set validation/defaults. Just mentioning this so we say "configure permissions" instead of hinting that users just toggle them "on and off". 🙂 

https://docs.directus.io/configuration/users-roles-permissions/#configuring-permissions

> edit, and create permissions can be turned on and off based on user role.

Author: Okay, sweet. I will write something like "fully configurable" and hyperlink it with that URL you just provided.

![image of Empty Dashboard](../assets/insights-images/insights_dashboard-grid.gif)

### Create, Edit, and Delete Dashboards

> ![image of dashboard with number by add and edit/delete buttons](../assets/insights-images/insights_dashboard_edit-and-delete-buttons.gif)

Reviewer 3: Since we may want users to quickly find these images on Google you should improve the description keywords.

For example, check this better approach
```suggestion
![Edit / delete panel in Directus Insights / dashboard](../assets/insights-images/insights_dashboard_edit-and-delete-buttons.gif)
```

Do you see the relevant keywords? Basically you just need to think how you would do a search to find this image. The same applies to all the other images 👍

Author: Yes, thanks @joselcvarela

1. Click the `+` icon to create a new Dashboard.

> 2. Click the dashboard item options to delete or edit the Dashboard

Author: okay. noted!

### Panel Header Options

All 4 panel types let you set custom text to provide quick and clear context about what a panel represents. Panel Header
options are exactly the same for all four panel types. They are also totally optional and can be hidden.

![image of Header Options](../assets/insights-images/insights_panels_panel-header-options.gif)

- **Visible** - Determines if the header is visible or not
- **Name** - Sets a name in the header area
- **Icon** - Sets a small icon by the name
- **Color** - Sets a color for the icon
- **Note** - Sets a short description of the icon

### Label Overview

As the name implies, this panel simply allows you to _label_ a group of other panels. Labels do not provide analytics.
Labels simply help visually group the other panels (_which do provide analytics_) and give context to your dashboard.

#### Label Panel Options

![Static image of a label options](../assets/insights-images/insights_panels_label-options.gif)

- **Label** - Sets the label text
- **Color** - Sets the label text color

### List Overview

List panels display some number of items from a collection, _as a list!_ These items displayed can be filtered by other

> criteria as well. So for example, you could show the site's top 5 selling products, 3 worst performing sales regions, 10

Reviewer: > show the site's top 5 selling products

Let's be careful about being too specific/leading within use-cases. These are good examples, but we should just say "you could show your top 5 selling products"... which removes "the site's" since there's a good chance the project is not for a website. Or as easy as "you could show a website's top 5 selling products" (with "a" being less direct about managing a website).

Author: Got it. It's going to take some time and repetition to subconsciously get over the paradigm shift that this is a general purpose DB wrapper but I totally see what you mean. Thanks

students with the highest GPA _that are also_ in intramural sports, or create any other kind of ranked list that your
dataset supports.

#### List Panel Options

![Image of List panel options](../assets/insights-images/insights_panels_list-panel-options.gif)

- **Collection** - Selects the collection to rank
- **Limit** - Limits the number of items that will appear in the dashboard

> - **Sort Field** - Sets the collection field you wish to order results by.

Reviewer: Let's be consistent with bullet lists, we should either end them in a period or not. I also change this up depending on text length, but we should be the same within each list.

Author: I would prefer to end them without a period, mainly because there is no direct subject in the grammar on these (and it encourages a trend towards short, simple explanations- which I think fits these "App Guide" docs. This instance is a lack of polish. But period or no period, I totally yield on whatever you want. Let me know!

- **Sort Direction** - Sets items to display in ascending or descending order

> - **Display Template** - Sets which fields will appear on-screen to represent list items

Reviewer: Always good to reference our proprietary config "stuff" with links to other Docs. In this case, "Display Templates" are used throughout the system, so we should have dedicated directions for how to work with this, and then link to that.

Reviewer: eg: add a "Learn more" link at the end

Author: Noted! Will add.

- **Filter** - Sets filters to only consider and rank items that meet some criteria

### Metrics Overview

> Metrics panels allow you to aggregate numeric fields into a single number.

Reviewer: Might need to update this, @jaycammarano just updated this to handle more than numbers. 🙂

Reviewer: Also, we're speaking with devs, but a brief overview of what aggregate functions are and can do might be nice. Or at least a `(eg: SUM, AVERAGE, etc)`.

Reviewer: Aaaand, `FIRST` and `LAST` aren't aggregate functions, so we should call those out. :)

Author: Yeah, I originally had one and it started to seem overwhelmingly large and like it belonged in more of a tutorial.
I will add something back in.

Reviewer: Docs should be comprehensive in terms of what we offer (I'd even like to LIST all the functions we support here with what they do). We'll only switch to Tutorials when the topic becomes subjective or includes external software integrations.

Author: Wow, okay. I can do it! But listing it will be a heavy duty, long doc.... OR since there is repetition among panel types, and new panels types are coming in steadily, I may need to fundamentally restructure my approach.

Reviewer: There are only 7-10 functions/aggregations... a short and simple bullet list with a short sentence on each is fine.

Reviewer 2: > It smells to me like a new Aggregates doc may in order?

Makes sense to me. It's also noted under the API reference: https://docs.directus.io/reference/query/#aggregation-grouping, but I don't want to point less technical users there for this info 👍🏻

Author: > Aaaand, `FIRST` and `LAST` aren't aggregate functions, so we should call those out. :)

Ben, here is how I addressed that:
```
::: tip First, Last, Minimum and Maximum

First, Last, Minimum and Maximum are not aggregates in the purely mathematical sense of the word.
However, they are placed in this panel option because they return one single Item.

:::
```

#### Metrics Panel Options

![Image of Metrics panel options](../assets/insights-images/insights_panels_metrics-panel-options.gif)

- **Collection** - Selects the collection
- **Field** - Selects the field to run aggregate function on
- **Aggregate Function** - Selects the type of aggregate to perform
- **Sort Field** - Sets the collection field you wish to order results by
- **Filter** - Sets filters to only only run metrics on items that meet some criteria

> ::: warning Must be numeric Non-numeric fields like text cannot be aggregated, so they become grayed out and

Reviewer: Again, let's update based on @jaycammarano's PR... I think certain functions just gray out based on the field.

Reviewer 4: Yes.

Author: ```
::: tip Why are some Fields grayed out?

Certain Fields cannot be used with certain aggregate functions. For example, you cannot use the average function on Fields that store text, because text cannot be averaged. When there is a conflict between panel options, Fields will be grayed out and un-selectable in the `field dropdown list`.

:::
```

Just confirming this is accurate.

- **Curve Type** - Sets curve to be shown as smooth, straight or stepline
- **Fill Type** - Sets fill type under curve to gradient, solid, or none
- **Filter** - Allows filtering of items considered for analysis based on logical conditions
- **Show X-axis** - Toggles display of time along X-axis
- **Show Y-axis** - Toggles display of numeric values along Y-axis

### Advanced Filtering

The filtering options are infinitely customizable. However, they will be limited by the collections, relations, and
information stored in your database.

#### Nested Filters

Sometimes, you will need to run filters that require information from two or more collections. Here might be a few
examples:

- Highest paid authors that wrote 5 or more books (uses `authors` and `books` collections)
- Products with less than 50 sales monthly (uses `products` and `orders` collections)
- Blog Posts with the highest number of social shares (uses `blog` and `social share metadata` collections )

Nested filters limit results of one collection by the values of fields from a related collection. Let's look at how to
create a nested filter:

![Image of a nested filter with numbers](image.jpg)

> 1. Create a filter

Reviewer: Again, Filters are a pretty global thing, we might want to have a really solid explanation somewhere, and link there. We can still give contextual guidance on this page, but should link to "learn more" within the main section

Author: I expanded the filters section earlier this evening. But honestly, I started to feel the scope started ballooning like crazy and cut it with some (expanded but) basic explanations.

I'm assuming the readers have zero SQL knowledge, but decent math, actively do analytics, and are pretty fire in excel.... Is that about right for these dashboard creators?

I'd like to take the approach that _the readers know what filters are and just need a primer on how ours work_ in the main docs... Then get super-duper granular in a 1 to 4 hour tutorial series... Let me know your thoughts on that strategy!

Reviewer: Anything within the Docs "App Guide" should be geared towards anyone (non-technical too) as a baseline, but with hints and details that help out the more technical power-users and admins.

> I'd like to take the approach that the readers know what filters are and just need a primer on how ours work in the main docs... Then get super-duper granular in a 1 to 4 hour tutorial series... Let me know your thoughts on that strategy!

Pretty close! I like this, and we can include permission tutorials for a bunch of subjective use-case examples. However, I do want to have dedicated sections in the Docs that thoroughly explain working with both permissions and filters (separately).

In general, we should have ONE dedicated and comprehensive place in the Docs for each feature/component/concept. Then, we reference/link to those authoritative sections throughout the docs as needed. For example, here in Insights (context, App Guide) we would simply mention Filters (maybe with 1+ relevant examples for this context)... but would link to the main section on how to work with Filters (authoritative, Configuration).

Make sense? This is chicken and the egg, since we'll need to make sure we have all those single-source-of-truth docs written first, so that we can link to them.

Author: Yeah, I get it! I mentioned to Rijk and Nils that I would love to add some dictionary table(s) DB that holds all of our terms and lets a user hover over some term and get a tooltip definition and "learn more" button. That's obviously a ways out. But I digress- "long story long", I think this approach is great. However, it will mean multiple and constant rounds of docs updates as more and more pages get added over the next several months (which I am totally happy about).

2. Select a foreign key field
3. Create a new filter
4. Nest it under the first filter by clicking and dragging the lower filter to the right
5. Select the filters to apply on this collection

> ::: tip Foreign Key A _foreign key field_ is a field that references the primary key (often times this is the `ID`)

Reviewer: Let's reference global explanations... this should link to the /Glossary page

Author: Foreign Key is not in the glossary yet.
(But I can add it real soon)

Author: "Mirror" it?? You mean add it into the glossary section? @benhaynes

Reviewer: Yup... copy/paste the PK to create a FK section

Author: > > [[toc]]
> > Doesn't add in ## and ### headers. Couldn't find this notation after multiple rounds of googling. 
>
> That sounds like a VuePress configuration to me. There might be configuration flag somewhere to have it inject h2 (`##`) and h3 (`###`) headers.
> 
Okay, I haven't messed with VuePress ever, but will take some time to get to know it this week.

> > Should the definition of Aggregate Functions go into the Glossary or the insights doc? (I think it should go in the glossary)
> 
> I think in the glossary.
> 
Cool cool!

> > Hyperlinks to other docs don't jump to /#section-header when testing.
> 
> Odd, how are you testing that exactly? Does the same problem exist on the live docs website?
> 
I simply just opened the docs in dev mode and tried to click on the hyperlinks.

> > This will eventually become a full page. for now, the definition is:    Defines how list items will be represented. Allows use of field item values as well as custom text. ... Later on it will be hyperlinked. Will that be good enough for the time being? Or should I expand this asap?
> 
> I think it's fine for now. Having it is better than not having it, and we can't get too stuck on making it perfect in the first cycle. We'll have to really treat this docs upgrade as an iterative process, otherwise we'll spend an infinite amount of fine-tuning, and never go live
> 

Sweet. I'm all about it. These last few days my understanding of the scope of the docs has expanded quite a bit!

> > Video delivered in iframe... Not sure how we want to handle the HTML/CSS for it.
> 
> Should be as simple as
> 
> ```
> <video autoplay muted loop>
>   <source src="https://cdn.directus.io/etc/etc/etc.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
> </video>
> ```

Using `<iframe>` made it a tiny little icon with black padding on the sides. `<Video>` delivers it full sized, without rounded edges. Some custom CSS will need to be added. It doesn't fit to column and. (I can do that but I have taken a peek at Dircetus CSS and it will take me a while to be confident I'm matching your CSS styling nuances properly)

> > When I run git commit, it reformats the ::: tip and ::: warning syntax causing a UI bug! Perhaps it has to do with a plugin in VSC... but then why would it only reformat on commits?
> 
> This is most likely a formatting issue then. Make sure to always have a whiteline before and after the `:::` block for it to work properly:
> 
> ```
> Some other text
> 
> ::: tip Example!
> 
> This is the content of the tip block
> 
> :::
> 
> Some other paragraph
> ```

There is a blank line before and after. I will go ham on google though to try and sort this out though.

field of another collection. ::: ::: tip How to filter against other tables Once a foreign key is selected on a filter,
any directly nested filters will take on the other fields from that collection. :::

## Tutorial Video

> Learn to make analytics dashboards with meaningful insights panels.

Reviewer: If we do a formal video, let's make sure to create 2-3 really nice dashboards for the example. The ones in our demos have obviously fake data and should be polished up a bit.

Author: @benhaynes  for the first "real" PR, I'm going to cut this entirely then add it back later... But wanted to note it now.
Over the next few weeks, I'd like to help develop an "insanely swag" practice database.
... Something generic enough for beginners, robust enough for "pros" to take respectably, and a data model that covers several major use cases.... Def need some time to get my feet wet, though.
